---
title: "OT for generative modeling 4 — One-step generation"
date: 2026-03-07
summary: "Placeholder."
---

## First-principles generative modeling

Any generative model of the form $x = g_\theta(z)$ which parameterizes noise pushforward need to address two fundamental tasks:

1. <u>Generation</u>: given noise, what's the corresponding sample?
2. <u>Density estimation</u>: what's the model density at a point? This could be the score $\nabla p$, likelihood ratio $\log p/q$, or explicitly $p$.

Task 1 is needed to specify a generative model, while task 2 is needed to optimize the maximum likelihood KL-objective. Density estimation can be direct density, likelihood-ratio $\log \rho^+/\rho^-$ or in form of the score $\nabla \log \rho$.

Two of the biggest challenges with generative modeling in my opinion, and our best solutions so far:

1. KL optimization is stiff: KL blows up when $\rho^+, \rho^-$ supports are disjoint, which almost inevitably happens in high-dimensional space. Score matching is high-variance, high-curvature in low-noise regimes, and well-behaved in high-noise regimes.
    - The best remedy is decomposing KL into the noise spectrum using the de Bruijn identity, using a natural basis in which to truncate divergent low-noise part of the integral, reweight, or importance-sample.
2. High-dimensional density estimation is hard: KDE variance scales with dimension.
    - The best remedy is using Tweedie to reduce density (score) estimation into a regression problem; this powers parameterized estimators to leverage the internal structure of data so that difficulty scales with manifold dimension and sample size.

We look for a one-shot generative framework that leverages both tools.

## Proposed architecture

### Notation and setup

- We consistently use $\rho$ for **data**, $\sigma$ for **latent**, and $\nu$ for **noise** ($\nu = \mathcal N(0, I)$).
- We use $+$ for data, $-$ for model. We write $\bar t := 1-t$.
- Subscript $\sigma^\pm_t$ denotes $t$-interpolation between $\sigma^\pm$ and $\mathcal N(0, I)$.

Consider a decoder $g_\theta$ together with an encoder $f_\varphi^{\pm, t}$ with a single boolean flag denoting data or model distribution, and a time parameter. **We require $f_\varphi^{+, 0}=f_\varphi^{-, 0}$ and just write $f_\varphi$ for this partial model** (this can be achieved by using $\pm t$ on a real line).

1. At $t=0$, the decoder generates images, and the encoder generates latents from images.
2. For $t \geq 0$, the encoder-decoder round-trip $f_\varphi^{\pm, t}\circ g_\theta(y^\pm_t) = \mathbb E[y^\pm_0 \mid y^\pm_t]$ predicts the denoised latents; this implicitly performs density estimation by Tweedie.

Let's make this precise. The encoder-decoders, together with the flow matching process, define the following distributions:

1. $\nu = \mathcal N(0, I)$ is pushed through the generator $g_\theta$.
2. Sample space:
    - Data distribution $\rho^+$.
    - Model sample distribution $\rho^-$. We finally want samples from here. This is the pushforward of $\nu$ through $g_\theta$
3. Latent space:
    - The distribution of data latent encoding $\sigma^+$, or $\sigma_0^+$, is the pushforward of $\rho^+$ through $f_\varphi$.
    - The distribution of model latent encoding $\sigma^-$, or $\sigma^-_0$, is the pushforward of $\rho^-$ through $f_\varphi$.
4. Latent noise processes.
    - We define $\sigma^\pm_t$ for $t\in [0, 1]$ as the $t$-mixture between $\sigma^\pm$ and $\mathcal N(0, I)$. It's generated by the independent coupling conditional linear-transport process.
5. We sample $t$ from $U=\mathrm{Unif}(0, 1)$.

### Loss breakdown

1. **Reconstruction**: It forces the encoder $f_\varphi$ to be injective over $\rho^+$, minimized w.r.t. $\varphi$ and $\theta$, and $g_\theta$ to be injective over $\sigma^+$:
    $$
    \begin{aligned}
        \mathcal L_e &= \mathbb E_{x\sim \rho^+} \| g_\theta(f_\varphi(x)) - x \|^2 \\
        \mathcal L_d &= \mathbb E_{y\sim \sigma^+} \| f_\varphi(g_\theta(y)) - y\|^2
    \end{aligned}
    $$
    In order to make the following encoder score estimate tractable by only minimizing $\varphi$, we also introduce a loss to make $g_\theta$ invertible over $y_t\sim \sigma^{\pm}_t$ by using e.g. an alternative head $\tilde f_\varphi$
    $$
        \tilde{\mathcal L}_d = \mathbb E_{y_t\sim \sigma^{\pm}_t} \|\tilde f_\varphi(g_\theta(y_t)) - y_t\|^2
    $$
2. **Encoder score estimate**: these are minimized w.r.t. $\varphi$. They ask the encoder to correctly estimate the score of the model and data latents, fixing the generator. We use the noise (marginal velocity) parameterization from CFM:
$$
    \mathcal L_s^\pm = \mathbb E_{\epsilon, y_t^\pm \sim \sigma^\pm_t} \|\hat \epsilon_t^\pm(y_t^\pm) - \epsilon\|^2, \quad
    \hat \epsilon^\pm_t(y^\pm_t)
    = \dfrac 1 t\left[y^\pm_t - \bar t\, f_\varphi^{\pm, t}(g_\theta(y^\pm_t))\right]
$$
Expanding out the sampling explicitly:
$$
\begin{aligned}
    \mathcal L_s^+ &=
        \mathbb E_{x\sim \rho^+, \,t\sim U} \mathbb E_{\epsilon \sim \mathcal N(0, I)} \left\|
            \hat \epsilon^+_t(y_t^+) - \epsilon
        \right\|^2, \quad
        y_t^+ := \bar t f_\varphi(x) + t\epsilon \\
    \mathcal L_s^- &=
        \mathbb E_{z\sim \nu, \, t\sim U} \mathbb E_{\epsilon \sim \mathcal N(0, I)} \left\|
            \hat \epsilon^-_t(y^-_t) - \epsilon
        \right\|^2, \quad
        y_t^- := \bar t f_\varphi(g_\theta(z)) + t\epsilon
\end{aligned}
$$
3. **Decoder score matching loss**: these are minimized w.r.t. $\theta$. They drift the generator in the direction which minimizes KL along the noise spectrum:
$$
\begin{aligned}
    \mathcal L_m
    &= \mathbb E_{x\sim \rho^+, \, t\sim U} \left[\dfrac {\bar t}{t^3} \| \overline{f^{+, t}_\varphi(g_\theta(y_t^+))} - f^{-, t}_\varphi(\overline{g_\theta}(y_t^+))\|^2\right] \\
    y_t^+ &= \bar t f_\varphi(g_\theta(f_\varphi(x))) + t\epsilon
\end{aligned}
$$
Please note that the only dependence on $\theta$ is introduced in the comptuation of $y_t^+$. We rely on $g_\theta \circ f_\varphi = \mathrm{Id}$ to resample $x$ using $\theta$, then push it through the roundtrip again (with frozen gradients) to do score matching. We use overlines to denote gradient-free applications or quantities. Note that the $f_\varphi^+$ term has full $\theta$-stopgrad because it's a frozen evaluation of the latent data score.

### Theoretical analysis

Maximum likelihood requires that we want to minimize $D(\rho^+ \| \rho^-)$. Note that $\rho^-$ is only dependent upon $\theta$. The whole proposal is fundamentally motivated by applying the following decomposition, applying the [data-processing inequality](https://nlyu1.github.io/classical-info-theory/kullback-leibler-divergence.html#prp:divergenceChainRule), de Bruijn, and Tweedie's formula in order:
$$
\begin{aligned}
    D(\rho^+ \| \rho^-)
    &= D(\sigma^+ \| \sigma^-) + \mathbb E_{y\sim \sigma^+} D(P_{\rho^+ | y} \| P_{\rho^-|y}) \\
    D(\sigma^+ \| \sigma^-)
    &= \int_0^1 \dfrac{t}{1-t}
        \mathbb E_{y_t\sim \sigma^+_t} \| \nabla \log \sigma^+_t(y_t) - \nabla \log \sigma^-_t(y_t) \|^2\, dt \\
    &= \mathbb E_{t\sim U}\left[
        \dfrac{\bar t}{t^3} \mathbb E_{y_t \sim \sigma^+_t} \left\|
           \mathbb E_+[y^+_0 | y_t] - \mathbb E_-[y^-_0|y_t]
        \right\|^2
    \right]
\end{aligned}
$$

#### Score matching

Write $y_*^\pm = \mathbb E_\pm[y^\pm_0\mid y_t]$ for the true posterior expectations and $\widehat{y_0^\pm} := f_\varphi^{\pm, t}(g_\theta(y_t))$ for our estimates, the score-matching loss can be bounded by standard triangle inequalities
$$
    \dfrac 1 3 \|y_*^+ - y_*^-\|^2 \leq \| y_*^+ - \widehat{y_*^+} \|^2 + \| y_*^- - \widehat{y_*^-} \|^2 + \|\widehat{y_*^+} - \widehat{y_*^-}\|^2
$$
The RHS three terms correspond to three loss pieces:
- $\| y_*^+ - \widehat{y_*^+}\|^2$ corresponds to $\mathcal L_s^+$ exactly by CFM construction.
- $\| y_*^- - \widehat{y_*^-}\|^2$ corresponds to $\mathcal L_s^-$ up to a change in measure $\sigma^-_t \mapsto \sigma^+_t$. If this is a serious problem, we can use the round-trip resampling trick to change the measure.
- $\|\widehat{y_*^+} - \widehat{y_*^-}\|^2$ corresponds to $\mathcal L_m$ approximately up to how well $f_\varphi \circ g_\theta \approx \mathrm{Id}$ over $\sigma^+$, which is enforced by the decoder injectivity loss $\mathcal L_d$.

#### DPI residual
If $f_\varphi$ is a true injection, then $D(\rho^+ \| \rho^-) = D(\sigma^+ \| \sigma^-)$. In practice, we optimize the DPI residual by assuming a Gaussian noise model and reducing it to encoder reconstruction loss $\mathcal L_e$, which explains why we're only enforcing the encoder injectivity over $\rho^+$ in $\mathcal L_e$. We provide an intuition-first analysis below.

To compute divergence, assume a noise model about the deterministic decoder output:
$$
    \rho^-(x\mid y) = \mathcal N(x;\, g_\theta(y), \beta I)
$$
This says that the posterior of the model distribution $\rho^-$ over observing latent $y$ is Gaussian about $g_\theta(y)$. Expanding the DPI residual:
$$
\begin{align}
    \mathbb E_{y\sim \sigma^+} D(P_{\rho^+ | y} \| P_{\rho^-|y})
    &= \mathbb E_{y\sim \sigma^+, \, x\sim \rho+\mid y} \left[\log \rho^+(x\mid y) - \log \rho^-(x\mid y)\right] \\
    &= - \mathbb E_{x\sim \rho^+} \log \rho^-(x\mid f_\varphi(x)) - h(X^+\mid Y) \\
    &\leq \mathbb E_{x\sim \rho^+} \dfrac 1 {2\beta} \|x - g_\theta(\varphi(x))\|^2 + C \\
    &= \dfrac 1 {2\beta} \mathcal L_e + C
\end{align}
$$
Note the simplifciation $\mathbb E_{y\sim \sigma^+, \, x\sim \rho^+\mid y} = \mathbb E_{(x, y)\sim P_{xy}} = \mathbb E_{x\sim \rho^+}$ because $P_{y\mid x}$ is a deterministic encoder.